Provide additional utilities for job testing. (#1617)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/additional-features/jobs.md

Jobs are Python code and can be tested as such, usually via [Django unit-test features](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/). That said, there are a few useful tricks specific to testing Jobs.

> While individual methods within your Job can and should be tested in isolation, you'll likely also want to test the entire execution of the Job. The simplest way to do so is via calling the `nautobot.utilities.testing.run_job_for_testing()` method, as this is the same function used to execute a Job via Nautobot's Celery worker process. As part of your test, you can call `run_job_for_testing()` directly rather than enqueuing it for the worker to handle; this is simpler and generally quite sufficient for testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While individual methods within your Job can and should be tested in isolation, you'll likely also want to test the entire execution of the Job. The simplest way to do so is via calling the `nautobot.utilities.testing.run_job_for_testing()` method, which is a helper wrapper around the `run_job` function used to execute a Job via Nautobot's Celery worker process.
```

Because of the way `run_job_for_testing` and more specifically `run_job()` (which `run_job_for_testing` wraps around) works, which is somewhat complex behind the scenes, you need to inherit from `nautobot.utilities.testing.TransactionTestCase` instead of `django.test.TestCase` (Refer to the [Django documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#provided-test-case-classes) if you're interested in the differences between these classes - `TransactionTestCase` from Nautobot is a small wrapper around Django's `TransactionTestCase`.)

!!! tip

>     Additionally, *if your test case needs to be backwards-compatible with test execution against Nautobot 1.2.x*, you should add the following block to your test module:

Reviewer: One downside of this PR is that the test approach it provides is no longer backwards-compatible to Nautobot 1.2.x since that doesn't have `run_job_for_testing` or the updated `TransactionTestCase`. So I guess maybe removing this tip and revising the below example would be appropriate?

Author: What do you think about having
- a "pre 1.2" section, potentially with a hint to `run_job_for_testing` + `TransactionTestCase` from 1.3 for copy-pastin
- a "post 1.2" section which is similar to this section?

Reviewer: Feels clunky, but maybe our best option for now. Thanks!

Author: Gave it a first try 👍🏻

### 1.3.x and later

The simplest way to test the entire execution of Jobs from 1.3 on is via calling the `nautobot.utilities.testing.run_job_for_testing()` method, which is a helper wrapper around the `run_job` function used to execute a Job via Nautobot's Celery worker process.

Because of the way `run_job_for_testing` and more specifically `run_job()` works, which is somewhat complex behind the scenes, you need to inherit from `nautobot.utilities.testing.TransactionTestCase` instead of `django.test.TestCase` (Refer to the [Django documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#provided-test-case-classes) if you're interested in the differences between these classes - `TransactionTestCase` from Nautobot is a small wrapper around Django's `TransactionTestCase`).

### 1.2.x

If your test case needs to be backwards-compatible with test execution against Nautobot 1.2.x, you need to handle a couple more things manually:

> - Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testing:
```

>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```python
````

  from django.conf import settings

  if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
      settings.DATABASES["job_logs"] = settings.DATABASES["job_logs"].copy()
      settings.DATABASES["job_logs"]["TEST"] = {"MIRROR": "default"}
  ```

> - Replicate the behavior of `run_job_for_testing` manually so that your test execution most closely resembles the way the celery worker would run the test and set up the `databases` field on the test class correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replicate the behavior of `run_job_for_testing` manually so that your test execution most closely resembles the way the celery worker would run the test:
```

  ```python
  import uuid

  from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model
  from django.contrib.contenttypes.models import ContentType
  
  from nautobot.extras.context_managers import web_request_context
  from nautobot.extras.jobs import run_job
  from nautobot.extras.models import JobResult, Job

  def run_job_for_testing(job, data=None, commit=True, username="test-user"):
      if data is None:
        data = {}
      user_model = get_user_model()
      user, _ = user_model.objects.get_or_create(username=username, is_superuser=True, password="password")
      job_result = JobResult.objects.create(
          name=job.class_path,
          obj_type=ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Job),
          user=user,
          job_id=uuid.uuid4(),
      )
      with web_request_context(user=user) as request:
          run_job(data=data, request=request, commit=commit, job_result_pk=job_result.pk)
      return job_result
  ```

> - Re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates them on every `tearDown`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set up the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates them on every `tearDown`:
```

  ```python
  from django.apps import apps
  from django.conf import settings
  from django.test import TransactionTestCase

  from nautobot.extras.management import populate_status_choices

  class MyJobTestCase(TransactionTestCase):
    # 'job_logs' is a proxy connection to the same (default) database that's used exclusively for Job logging
    if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
        databases = ("default", "job_logs")

    def setUp(self):
        super().setUp()
        populate_status_choices(apps, None)
  ```

---

> A simple example of a Job test case that's implemented to be backwards-compatible with Nautobot 1.2.x might look like the following:

Reviewer: I'd probably change the below example to just be a 1.3.x example - right now it's sort of in-between where it implements some of the above 1.2.x compatibility suggestions but not all of them and I find it a bit confusing as a result.

Jobs are Python code and can be tested as such, usually via [Django unit-test features](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/). That said, there are a few useful tricks specific to testing Jobs.

While individual methods within your Job can and should be tested in isolation, you'll likely also want to test the entire execution of the Job. Nautobot 1.3 introduced a few enhancements to make this simpler to do, but it's also quite possible to test under Nautobot 1.2 with a bit more effort.

> ### Nautobot 1.3 and later

Reviewer 2: TODO: This should provide a note that this functionality does not exist in early versions of 1.3. Whether we update it here or leave it as a footnote to do before shipping the next release.

### Nautobot 1.3 and later

The simplest way to test the entire execution of Jobs from 1.3 on is via calling the `nautobot.utilities.testing.run_job_for_testing()` method, which is a helper wrapper around the `run_job` function used to execute a Job via Nautobot's Celery worker process.

Because of the way `run_job_for_testing` and more specifically `run_job()` works, which is somewhat complex behind the scenes, you need to inherit from `nautobot.utilities.testing.TransactionTestCase` instead of `django.test.TestCase` (Refer to the [Django documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#provided-test-case-classes) if you're interested in the differences between these classes - `TransactionTestCase` from Nautobot is a small wrapper around Django's `TransactionTestCase`).

### Nautobot 1.2

If your test case needs to be backwards-compatible with test execution against Nautobot 1.2.x, you need to handle a couple more things manually:

> Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testing:
> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testing:

```python
```

from django.conf import settings

if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
    settings.DATABASES["job_logs"] = settings.DATABASES["job_logs"].copy()
    settings.DATABASES["job_logs"]["TEST"] = {"MIRROR": "default"}

>   ```
> Replicate the behavior of `run_job_for_testing` manually so that your test execution most closely resembles the way the celery worker would run the test:
> ```python

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

Replicate the behavior of `run_job_for_testing` manually so that your test execution most closely resembles the way the Celery worker would run the test:

```python
````

More generally, we have `invoke markdownlint` now available in `develop` - please run it and fix any other issues it reports.

import uuid
from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model
from django.contrib.contenttypes.models import ContentType

from nautobot.extras.context_managers import web_request_context
from nautobot.extras.jobs import run_job
from nautobot.extras.models import JobResult, Job

def run_job_for_testing(job, data=None, commit=True, username="test-user"):
    if data is None:
        data = {}
    user_model = get_user_model()
    user, _ = user_model.objects.get_or_create(username=username, is_superuser=True, password="password")
    job_result = JobResult.objects.create(
        name=job.class_path,
        obj_type=ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Job),
        user=user,
        job_model=job,
        job_id=uuid.uuid4(),
    )
    with web_request_context(user=user) as request:
        run_job(data=data, request=request, commit=commit, job_result_pk=job_result.pk)
    return job_result

> ```
> Setup the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates them on every `tearDown`:
> ```python

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

Setup the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates (deletes) them on every `tearDown`:

```python
````

Because of the way `run_job_for_testing` and more specifically `run_job()` works, which is somewhat complex behind the scenes, you need to inherit from `nautobot.utilities.testing.TransactionTestCase` instead of `django.test.TestCase` (Refer to the [Django documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#provided-test-case-classes) if you're interested in the differences between these classes - `TransactionTestCase` from Nautobot is a small wrapper around Django's `TransactionTestCase`).

### Nautobot 1.2

If your test case needs to be backwards-compatible with test execution against Nautobot 1.2.x, you need to handle a couple more things manually:

Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testing:

```python
from django.conf import settings

if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
    settings.DATABASES["job_logs"] = settings.DATABASES["job_logs"].copy()
    settings.DATABASES["job_logs"]["TEST"] = {"MIRROR": "default"}

>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
````

Replicate the behavior of `run_job_for_testing` manually so that your test execution most closely resembles the way the celery worker would run the test:

```python
import uuid
from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model
from django.contrib.contenttypes.models import ContentType

from nautobot.extras.context_managers import web_request_context
from nautobot.extras.jobs import run_job
from nautobot.extras.models import JobResult, Job

def run_job_for_testing(job, data=None, commit=True, username="test-user"):
    if data is None:
        data = {}
    user_model = get_user_model()
    user, _ = user_model.objects.get_or_create(username=username, is_superuser=True, password="password")
    job_result = JobResult.objects.create(
        name=job.class_path,
        obj_type=ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Job),
        user=user,

>         job_model=job,

Reviewer: In 1.2 there is no `job_model` field on `JobResult`.
```suggestion
```

        job_id=uuid.uuid4(),
    )
    with web_request_context(user=user) as request:
        run_job(data=data, request=request, commit=commit, job_result_pk=job_result.pk)
    return job_result
```

Setup the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates them on every `tearDown`:

```python
from django.apps import apps
from django.conf import settings
from django.test import TransactionTestCase

from nautobot.extras.management import populate_status_choices

class MyJobTestCase(TransactionTestCase):
    # 'job_logs' is a proxy connection to the same (default) database that's used exclusively for Job logging
    if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
        databases = ("default", "job_logs")

    def setUp(self):
        super().setUp()
        populate_status_choices(apps, None)
```

---

> A simple example of a Job test case for 1.3.x and forward might look like the following:

Reviewer: Would it flow better, do you think, to move this example up into the "Nautobot 1.3 and later` section?

Author: Yes, that makes a lot of sense, thanks!

Jobs are Python code and can be tested as such, usually via [Django unit-test features](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/). That said, there are a few useful tricks specific to testing Jobs.

> While individual methods within your Job can and should be tested in isolation, you'll likely also want to test the entire execution of the Job. Nautobot 1.3 introduced a couple of changes to the way Jobs are handled. As a consequence, the recommended job testing approach also differs between 1.2.x and 1.3.x and later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While individual methods within your Job can and should be tested in isolation, you'll likely also want to test the entire execution of the Job. Nautobot 1.3 introduced a few enhancements to make this simpler to do, but it's also quite possible to test under Nautobot 1.2 with a bit more effort.
```

> ### 1.3.x and later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Nautobot 1.3 and later
```

The simplest way to test the entire execution of Jobs from 1.3 on is via calling the `nautobot.utilities.testing.run_job_for_testing()` method, which is a helper wrapper around the `run_job` function used to execute a Job via Nautobot's Celery worker process.

Because of the way `run_job_for_testing` and more specifically `run_job()` works, which is somewhat complex behind the scenes, you need to inherit from `nautobot.utilities.testing.TransactionTestCase` instead of `django.test.TestCase` (Refer to the [Django documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#provided-test-case-classes) if you're interested in the differences between these classes - `TransactionTestCase` from Nautobot is a small wrapper around Django's `TransactionTestCase`).

> ### 1.2.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Nautobot 1.2
```

      job_result = JobResult.objects.create(
          name=job.class_path,
          obj_type=ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Job),
          user=user,
          job_id=uuid.uuid4(),
      )
      with web_request_context(user=user) as request:
          run_job(data=data, request=request, commit=commit, job_result_pk=job_result.pk)
      return job_result
  ```
- Setup the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates them on every `tearDown`:
  ```python
  from django.apps import apps
  from django.conf import settings
  from django.test import TransactionTestCase

  from nautobot.extras.management import populate_status_choices

  class MyJobTestCase(TransactionTestCase):
    # 'job_logs' is a proxy connection to the same (default) database that's used exclusively for Job logging
    if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
        databases = ("default", "job_logs")

    def setUp(self):
        super().setUp()
        populate_status_choices(apps, None)

>   ```

Reviewer: Not sure if this is another case of local rendering not quite matching up with ReadTheDocs, but these code blocks inside a list aren't rendering properly on RTD. Perhaps remove the list formatting, i.e. just:

````markdown
Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testing:

```python
...
```

Replicate the behavior of `run_job_for_testing` manually so that your test execution most closely resembles the way the celery worker would run the test:

```python
...
```

Set up the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates (deletes) them on every `tearDown`:

```python
...
```
````

---

A simple example of a Job test case for 1.3.x and forward might look like the following:

```python
from django.apps import apps
from django.test import TransactionTestCase

from nautobot.extras.management import populate_status_choices
from nautobot.extras.models import Job, JobLogEntry
from nautobot.utilities.testing import run_job_for_testing

class MyJobTestCase(TransactionTestCase):

    def setUp(self):
        super().setUp()
        populate_status_choices(apps, None)

>     

Reviewer: Not needed, right, now that `TransactionTestCase` itself calls `populate_status_choices`?

class MyJobTestCase(TransactionTestCase):
    def test_my_job(self):
        # Testing of Job "MyJob" in file "my_job_file.py" in $JOBS_ROOT
        job = Job.objects.get(job_class_name="MyJob", module_name="my_job_file", source="local")
        # or, job = Job.objects.get_for_class_path("local/my_job_file/MyJob")
        job_result = run_job_for_testing(job, data={}, commit=False)

        # Since we ran with commit=False, any database changes made by the job won't persist,
        # but we can still inspect the logs created by running the job
        log_entries = JobLogEntry.objects.filter(job_result=job_result)
        for log_entry in log_entries:
            self.assertEqual(log_entry.message, "...")
```

### Nautobot 1.2

If your test case needs to be backwards-compatible with test execution against Nautobot 1.2.x, you need to handle a couple more things manually:

Set up the `"job_logs"` database correctly for testing:

```python
from django.conf import settings

if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
    settings.DATABASES["job_logs"] = settings.DATABASES["job_logs"].copy()
    settings.DATABASES["job_logs"]["TEST"] = {"MIRROR": "default"}

>  ```

Reviewer: Space here is breaking RTD rendering.

````suggestion
```
````

    user, _ = user_model.objects.get_or_create(username=username, is_superuser=True, password="password")
    job_result = JobResult.objects.create(
        name=job.class_path,
        obj_type=ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Job),
        user=user,
        job_id=uuid.uuid4(),
    )
    with web_request_context(user=user) as request:
        run_job(data=data, request=request, commit=commit, job_result_pk=job_result.pk)
    return job_result
```

Setup the `databases` field on the test class correctly, and re-create the default Statuses on `setUp` in your test classes, because `django.test.TransactionTestCase` truncates them on every `tearDown`:

```python
from django.apps import apps
from django.conf import settings
from django.test import TransactionTestCase

from nautobot.extras.management import populate_status_choices

class MyJobTestCase(TransactionTestCase):
    # 'job_logs' is a proxy connection to the same (default) database that's used exclusively for Job logging
    if "job_logs" in settings.DATABASES:
        databases = ("default", "job_logs")

    def setUp(self):
        super().setUp()
        populate_status_choices(apps, None)
```

> !!! tip

Reviewer: Possibly move this tip up into to the 1.3 section as well?
